---
title: "Detection of Heart Rate Variability From a Wearable Differential ECG Device"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2016-05-30-ecg-mipro
excerpt: 'Extracting heart rate variability from noise ECG signal extracted from mobile sensor'
date: 2015-05-30
venue: 'DC VIS Mipro proceedings'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1109/MIPRO.2016.7522182'
citation: Slak J., Kosec G. (2016). Detection of Heart Rate Variability From a Wearable Differential ECG Device, DC VIS Mipro proceedings, Croatia, Opatija, 30. May 2016.
share: false
---

[Download paper here]({{site.baseurl}}/files/CP_2016_SlakKosec_Mipro.pdf )

## Abstract

The precise heart rate variability is extracted from an ECG signal measured by a wearable sensor
that constantly records the heart activity of an active subject for several days. Due to the limited
resources of the wear- able ECG device the signal can only be sampled at relatively low,
approximately 120 Hz, frequency. Besides low sampling rate the signal from a wearable sensor is also
burdened with much more noise than the standard 12-channel ambulatory ECG, mostly due to the design
of the device, i.e. the electrodes are positioned relatively close to each other, and the fact
that the subject is active during the measurements. To extract heart rate variability with 1 ms
precision, i.e. 10 times more accurate than the sample rate of the measured signal, a two-step
algorithm is proposed. In first step an approximate global search is performed, roughly determining
the point of interest, followed by a local search based on the Moving Least Squares approximation
to refine the result. The methodology is evaluated in terms of accuracy, noise sensitivity, and
computational complexity. All tests are performed on simulated as well as measured data. It is
demonstrated that the proposed algorithm provides accurate results at a low computational cost and
it is robust enough for practical application.
